Now that we've covered the basics of Python programming we're going to put it all together and make
a game called mastermind.
Now you may have played most of mine before.
It was one of my favorite games as a boy and it works like this one player chooses a sequence of four
colored pins and then hides them away in one end of the board.
The other player then has to guess that sequence and they get the sequence by making a guess and then
they receive white or red pins in response and they get a white pin for every color that they get correct.
But in the wrong place.
So in this case they've got a blue which is correct but in the wrong place and they get a red pin for
every color that they get correct.
And in the right place.
So here they've got a red in the correct place.
So they get a red and they've got a purple in the wrong place.
So they get a white for that and then they just have to keep guessing until they get it completely right.
It's fairly straightforward.
But feel free to have a read of the Wikipedia master mind page to get absolutely clear on how the rules
work.
And there is one thing that I want to show you from the programming side before I set you up on the
challenge and that is that so far we haven't actually seen a way to interact with the user in Python
as yet.
And we're going to set up a very simple way to do that here and that's using GET variables.
So I'm just going to show you how GET variables work in Python and then send you off to make the game
in order to use GET variables in Python.
We need to import the CGI library.
Now we've never done anything like this in javascript or HP but we do need to do it in Python and related
languages.
Essentially we're bringing in extra functions that otherwise wouldn't be included in the program if
they're not needed.
So if you want to connect to my school database for example then you would import a library then as
well.
So this CGI or common Gateway Interface brings in a bunch of functions which allows us to communicate
with the user or the browser.
One of them being being able to access GET and POST variables and we do this by setting up a variable
which is normally called form and we set that equal to CGI dot field storage
which kind of makes sense.
This is the field storage for post and get variables.
Notice that there's no difference between post and get as far as Python or CGI are concerned that will
one and the same.
So we could use either here.
So let's add a GET variable onto how you are entering.
So I'll just use name equals Rob.
It's obviously not going to do anything different.
As yet I haven't saved it but if I want to access that then I just do something like print form don't
get value.
And then name.
So we take how CGI Topfield storage and get a particular value from it.
Simple as that.
So that should print Rob there we go.
Now notice that we have an issue if we try and access a value which doesn't exist then it returns None.
And if we try and use that in our program it will likely generate an error.
So what we should do is check to see whether our get variable exists before we try and use it.
And there's an easy way to do that.
So if we're looking for the GET variable name then we can see whether it exists in the form object by
looking for name in form.
And that's a really handy formulation that allows us to look for a particular value in what is effectively
a dictionary.
It's not quite a dictionary but we can think of it more or less as that.
So if there's a name in form then we could print it
and maybe else we could print something like that.
So at the moment we'll print Rob.
And then if I changed
to use a name then we get no name so simple as that.
That's the only thing that you needed him.
So now it's time to make the game.
Now you can make it any way you like but the way I'm going to build it to keep things simple graphically
is to use numbers rather than colors.
So essentially I'm going to get the python script to generate a random four digit number which then
the user has to guess.
So the user is entering a number and we're comparing the digits of that four digit number to the true
value.
So the one thing that you will have to do that you haven't seen yet is generate random numbers but I'm
sure with a little bit of googling you can figure out how to do that in Python.
Of course if you want to create a graphical version then fantastic Go for it.
But I'm focusing on the code side of things rather than the graphical side.
So the numbers make more sense from that point of view.
They give it a good shot.
Best of luck.
All right.
Did you manage it.
I hope so.
I'm going to get back.
See an almost empty page.
I'll leave the import CGI and the form there because we're going to be using that later on.
But I'll start off by generating the form for the user.
So I will have a title.
Mastermind
and I'll just make sure that's displaying OK great
and then print something like
let's go for double quotes here so that I can put the single quote in that I've chosen a four digit
number.
Can you guess it
gay.
And then we'll have our form
which is going to have an input with a type of text and a name
of guess
and then we'll have an input with a type of submit and a value of guess
and then we'll now form
OK.
Let's take a look at that.
Great.
So I'll just have a quick guess to make sure the forms connected up.
All right.
And we should find that guess in they you are registering now.
Wonderful.
So a quick thing I think I'd like that guess to appear in the box so that the user knows what they've
guessed each time.
So let's set that up.
So we'll check to see if there is a guess.
So if there's a guess in the form i.e. in the query string for the UI around then we'll set guess equal
to a form don't get value.
Guess And if not
we'll set guess to be just an empty string.
OK.
And then we can just add a value here.
And we'll put in guess to that value.
OK let's have a look.
So we should now find.
Yep there we go that I guess is there.
All right.
So now we've set up the user interface.
We're going to have to guess that four digit number.
So let's find out how to generate a random number in Python.
We I don't even need to spell generate correctly.
Google is clever enough.
Here we go.
Generate random integers between 0 and 9 that is promising.
OK there we go.
I've actually tried out that first one and I had issues with the python set up that we've got on the
web server so I'm going to try the second one here.
That's worked better for me.
But if you're using Python in a different way that might work well for you.
I'm going to go for the second answer.
So we need to import random just like we imported CGI up here so that we can use various random functions
and then what I really want to generate is a random string of numbers because the user is going to be
entering effectively a string.
And so it's going to be easy to easier to compare.
If the answer is in the form of a string as well.
So I'm going to set up an empty string called answer and then I'm going to set up a loop to add four
random digits to that answer.
So I will go for i in range
we can use range for to go from zero to full or there are two or three really repeated four times is
what we're really interested in.
And then to generate that random integer we use random rant and then 0 9.
So let's see that's
not we're going to need to convert that to a string.
So we use SDR to do that.
And then I want to append that to answer.
So going to answer.
Plus equals.
And then that string and that should do it.
So for now let's just print onset to make sure that we are generating a random string of four digits
that's looking promising.
0 8 5 4 1 0 1 4 1 9 5 6 wonderful OK.
So that's really good but we don't want to generate a new string every time the user makes a guess.
Otherwise that's going to make the game very very hard.
So we're going to need a way to store the answer.
And I think the simplest way to do it is to make it a hidden variable inside the form.
So let's add a new input with a type of hidden and name equals serve and volley is going to be equal
to a onza So of course that means that anyone could cheat in this game by looking at the source of the
code and finding the answer in there.
But I don't think that's a major issue here if people really want to do that then fair game to them.
So once we've got that then we can check to see if there's an answer in form and if there is we'll set
the answer equal to a forum to get value.
So
and if there isn't then we'll create a new onza
like that.
So now we should generate an answer the first time.
But then every time after that it will be the same onsets of guessing the same thing each time.
Let's have a look at that and I think I've gotten a plus there.
And also a close double quotes there as well.
Let's have a look.
So first time we've generated a random number 7 1 9 7.
But if I submit I guess then the answer remains the same.
7 1 9 7.
While we're here we're going to need to keep track of the number of guesses of the user as well.
Because they're going to need to be able to get it within a certain number of guesses.
So let's create
another hidden variables with the name of number of guesses.
And we'll set the value equal to the variable called number of guesses which I haven't defined yet.
But that's OK.
And just a thought as well.
But notice the user is going to see the answer in the string up here which isn't great but there's a
very easy fix for that.
We'll just switch from get to post which remember is not differentiated at all by the python script
anyway.
So if I just change that to method equals post then that should work fine.
So now let's just set up our number of guesses so I will use the same set up as before if number of
guesses in form.
Then we'll set number of guesses to be equal to it.
Form a dog get Valley number of guesses and we're going to need it to be an inch.
Because we're going to add 1 to it's in fact we'll have one right there because if this is being processed
it means they've had a new guess say Else number.
Forget our code on that number of guesses is zero.
And then because number of guesses is an integer.
We're going to need to convert it to a string.
One way of displaying it down that k.
Take a look at that.
So let's just get rid of the query strings completely say we're more or less starting afresh.
So there's a new random number.
Now if I make a guess one two three four then you can see it has remained but the random number but
it's not in the query string which is great if we have a look at the source.
We've got our random number there and outguess it.
Value of 1 which is promising we guess again we should get
a number of guesses being too wonderful.
OK so we're coming along nicely now it's the fun bit because we need to work out how accurate the user's
guess is.
So we need to work out.
Remember the number of red pins and the number of white pins essentially.
Remember they get a red pin if they get a digit in the right place.
So let's check for that.
Now we only want to verify I guess if I've actually made a guess.
So let's write our case for that here and just in case something strange happens I will set up our answer
before the guests that we know that we can access the answer variable as well.
So we're going to want to loop through that guess and then check that against the equivalent number
or equivalent digit in the answer.
So looping through a string is actually really easy.
It's the same as looping through a list.
We just use We're doing that for let's say digit in guess and then that would loop three.
In our case one two three and then four.
So we want to compare that to 7 5 8 and 3 which means we're going to need not just the digit but the
place in the string as well.
Now one way to do that would be to have a counter variable and then add 1 to it each time.
But I suspect there's a better way.
And essentially what we want is the key and the value.
So the key will be 0 1 2 3 and the valuable B in this case 1 2 3 and 4.
So let's see if we can find a way in Python to do that Python for loop get key and value for at least
something like that.
And that top results looks promising.
Essentially what we want to recreate is ph PS for each array as key value function ha.
And here we've got it says the numerator function in Python.
And indeed in swift and a few other programming languages as well.
So that we can get the key and the value which is what we want.
So instead of just digit Let's get key and digit in and instead of guess it's enumerate guess that we
go.
And notice that of course guess is a string here.
But we can effectively treat strings as lists of digits or characters.
And that way we can enumerate them or loop through them with a flip just in the same way we would a
list.
So just to convince ourselves that's worked let's just print digit to make sure that that's worked OK
and we should get one two three four every game.
And that's print key as well.
What should we get this time should be 0 1 2 3
0 1 2 3 because the keys always start at zero right.
So what we want to check is whether digit
is equal to that equivalent character or digit in the answer.
So to get that we can use answer and then key
and if that's the case that means they've got one number or digit in the right place.
So they get an extra red.
So let's define red as being 0.
And whites being 0 as well.
And then we can add one to the number of reds.
If I get one in the right place.
So just to check that that's worked let's print the number of reds for a few guesses.
So one two three four.
We shouldn't get any ready for that because there's no numbers in the right place for that answer.
So it's excellent.
What if we get a 3 at the end and that three is correct.
So we should get one we go.
If we get 8 three you get two excellent and if we get the whole thing right we get four.
Wonderful.
So that's what let's now set up the whites we only anyone to check for whites if this one isn't already
in the right place.
So I think the simplest way to do this is to just loop through the on string.
So I'll create a variable answer digit in Onslow and then we're essentially looping through answer.
And then we'll check to see if the answer digit is equal to our guess which is digit.
So this is the case then they've got one right but it can't be in the right place because we're using
elves here and we've already checked whether it's in the right place.
So if we're down here it's definitely not in the right place.
So if we get to here then they must have got one correct.
But in the wrong place.
So we'll add one to White's
there is a danger that they'll get two whites for one number here if they've guessed to three for example
and there's two threes in the answer that would give them to whites which may be how you want your version
of mastermind to work.
But in the official version you would only get one white if you got 1 3 in the wrong place.
Even if there were two threes in the answer.
So I'm going to deal with that by using borate which we've seen before in javascript and it works in
HP as well.
It will generally break us out of the for loop so it will stop going through this process which means
that we'll only get a maximum of one extra white for each digit that I get in the right place.
All right.
So that should actually check all our Whyte's for us.
Let's print whites and have a look.
So if I get 7 5 8 3 I should get zero whites because I've got them all right but they're all in the
right place.
Let's stay 0 0 0 7.
I should give me one right because I've got a 7 in the wrong place.
Excellent.
And if I put an 8 in there as the second digit that should give me two whites.
Everything seems to be working fine.
And I'll just put a five in.
Make sure that you give us three.
And finally a 3 at the beginning should give us four.
Wonderful.
So that all seems to be working great.
So now it's just a matter of letting the user know how many guesses they've had and how many whites
and how many reds they've got.
So let's create a message variable which we're going to fill with the message for the user and we'll
start by checking if the number of guesses is equal to zero.
And if that's the case we'll set message equal to the
the starting message.
Which should put
like that and while we're here
we'll just add message
there.
So if they've just started the game they haven't started guessing yet.
So they've got zero guesses.
Then we'll show them the start of message that otherwise we're going to generate the message from the
number of reds and whites.
So let's go for
you have
reds
digits in the right place and let's call them correct teachers just to let you have that number of correct
digits in the right place and Whyte's
correct digits in the wrong place and also tell them you have had a number of guesses.
Guesses
and we should probably put brackets around that
if you want to get your plurals correct then you could always do some checking to see if Reade's is
more than one that it's a plural etc. but I won't waste your time with doing that right now.
OK let's have a look.
So if I guess 3 8 5 7 and something's gone horribly wrong I guess.
Can you see what it is.
All of these are integers and I need them to be strings so I will just use SDR to convert them to strings.
And then we get to have a look.
Exham So we've got nought correct digits in the wrong in the right place and four correct digits in
the wrong place and we've had 12 guesses.
That looks pretty bang on.
So we're actually pretty close.
I think the only thing we need to add is a message when they finally get it right.
So we should check here.
We should have an else if and we're looking for reds being equal to four.
So that means they've got it right.
So if Redds is four will that message equal to a
while you've got it in
as to number of guesses.
Guess is and you might want to have some kind of scoring system that if they get it in less than 10
then they've done well or whatever it might be.
But I'll leave that up to you.
What I am going to add is I play again link which is actually very easy if we just do an empty link
that will link back to this page without submitting the form so it will effectively restart the game.
So if we can just do a play again.
And then we'll have other else there to be a normal response.
All right so let's play the game.
I've forgotten that in Python else if is I think slightly oddly but very concisely reduced to Elif I
don't think.
All right so that's it.
All that remains I think is to have a go of the game and let's see how many goes I can get this in.
So let's start with something like 1 1 2 2.
OK.
One correct digit in the right place and one in the wrong place.
So I'm going to change that to one on one to see whether it is a one or two.
And there we go.
So definitely I've got one of those in the right place.
That's changed that's one triple t.
OK.
So I'm fairly sure then that there's a 1 in the second digit that would get the one in the second digit
and no twos.
That's useful information.
Let's try to zero in there and see what happens.
OK in those areas
that's pop a 7 in there.
No sevens.
I don't know why she's seven or choiceless What my way up.
We'll do a three
OK three 4 Ah.
That was a bit of luck.
Two correct digits in the right place.
OK.
We're not doing too badly.
Five one correct digit in the wrong place to the last one must be a five.
So let's make that a six and put a five at the end.
I already checked seven Let's check 8 right now.
So I'm pretty certain that that must be a 9.
No it's not.
What did I make a mistake with my seven that's the only one I haven't checked in this run for let's
have a look.
And we got it for 175 it was say 13 guesses.
When you play this game that is your standard debate I'm sure you can manage it.
We've got no space between 13 and guesses there.
So let's just tweak that.
But every guy and then let's just make sure the play again works.
It does indeed.
Wonderful.
So I hope you enjoyed that one.
Do tweet me and let me know if you can do it in less than 13 guesses.
That's probably more efficient ways than the way that I did it.
And that takes us to the end of our Python run three.
I hope you can appreciate what I said at the beginning of this section.
The Python is a very nice language to look at and a nice language to work with.
And if you're interested in getting a raspberry pi or something like that and building something in
the real world that may be part of the internet of things one day then Python is a great language to
do that in.
This also brings us to the end of the complete web developer of course.
So I hope you've enjoyed yourself and there's just one more video to go and that is where do we go from
here.